a couple of small significant anecdotes
about go un embarrassing anecdotes about
Goen 11
uh that are important to me that are
sort of the closing of cycles and some
some degree one is that um Golan was uh
a part of the first ex an exhibition at
the first gray area festival with the
fat gold pre art and Technology Labs um
and so it's delightful to um have him
back here again at sort of this decade
Mark um and another is that Golan was
actually the last person I saw in travel
at the end of uh before the lockdown I
was in Pittsburgh with our um uh board
chair at the time Peter hburg and we
were talking about collaboration stuff
and the News came on that the airports
were going to shut down and we had to
run and get the last playing out of
Pittsburgh back and then something
happened and like here we are and so
like it's good good to see you again a
you
know um we return
um Golan is a professor of electronic
art at car melon
University thank
you thank you so much Barry and gray
area is this up can you guys hear me
right wasn't wonderful oh my God I'm so
happy to be here as I was saying to
Chris colen a few minutes ago my whole
life has led to this point uh okay um hi
I'm Goan L as Barry mentioned I teach
computational and interactive New Media
art at carneg millon University in
Pittsburgh I'm thrilled and very deeply
privileged to be here at greay area
today uh these days I primarily identify
as an educator a new media arts educator
and so in addition to my many peers and
colleagues and friends who I see in the
house today I want to shout out to my
former students uh a couple of whom are
here like Char Styles who is performing
tonight don't miss her Set uh today is
also an extremely unusual coincidence
for me personally because two of my most
significant former mentors are also here
uh pioneering New Media artti artist
Michael Neymar uh and legendary
competitional designer John MAA I
express my gratitude to them uh which I
don't do as often as I should uh Michael
Neymar better than anyone else I know uh
has thought really deeply about what it
means to operate as an artist in the
context of sort of technological res
research and high technology
environments uh for Michael at interval
research in 1994 I learned that my field
has a name and New Media art and this
was a potent Revelation for me at a time
uh a dark time before search engines
even existed and connected me to a
like-minded community at a time when
being an art technology hybrid felt
impossibly lonely um some years ago
Michael wrote this article first word
art last word art which I still share
with my students about the joys and
Perils of working in New Media where we
we are constantly jostling to explore
the recently possible yet paradoxically
yearning to make something that's
Timeless uh from John maida who was here
and spoke earlier uh in my grad school
at uh his Aesthetics and computation
group at MIT I learned that there was a
need and an opportunity and even an
approach or method to create places for
the education of and protection of uh
art technology hybrid people uh this
directly informed my work as director of
the studio for Creative inquiry at
Carnegie melon which was founded in 1989
which I directed from uh 2009 to 2022
it's a kind of academic cousin to the
gray area I can't emphasize enough how
art technology institutions uh and
weirdness protection centers like the
gray area are precious and improbable
and exist despite enormous odds please
support
them um in the context of first word art
I've long argued that artists need to
claim a seat at the table in defining
technological agendas in reimagining
what our tools should do and what sorts
of New Media we want to bring into
existence with them uh this is more
urgent than ever in relationship to
machine learning and AI which if not the
topic of this Festival is certainly an
under a strong undercurrent tools which
we know are being used for exploitation
for surveillance for redlining and for
genocide um it's sometimes difficult to
imagine how to respond to these
technological Trends without just
shutting down entirely and as artists I
feel we have a duty to explore the
culture of computation as my Krueger has
said and take up these Technologies in
the service of Aesthetics in the words
of Caroline Jones Whitney spazza has
likewise pointed out that what we think
Computing looks like has been dominated
by figures from stem Fields but there
are already contributors to this history
from the Arts especially whose important
contributions have been overlooked and I
think the challenge is to explore
Technologies as artists without becoming
complicit in the ways they are ruining
the world uh through for example
uncritical technophilic boosterism uh I
should also say quoting my off and
collaborator tiger brain that it goes
both ways just as code literacies have
long been deemed essential in the Arts
uh and Humanity spaces and we've all
been subjected to the everyone should
learn to code rhetoric uh I also insist
on advocating for and cultivating arts
literacies in engineering
spaces so uh the topic of my talk today
is generativity um which ours
Electronica curator Geri stalker has
called one of the four pillars of new
media art along with transmediality
connectivity and immersivity all of
these are interesting uh and I'll
confess I'm kind of a generalist in the
uh field of new media art I've worked in
all four of these uh but my focus today
is generativity and I'll also announce
upfront that I'm going to speak about
this topic rather imprecisely uh breezly
moving uh between procedural and let's
say statistical modes of generating
generating media after half a century in
the shadows it feels like it's finally
time the last few years have been an
incredible Heyday for generative
art uh AI of course looms large in our
understanding of generativity but I
would argue in a very narrow way it
seems to be me that most popular Notions
of generativity have coalesced to a kind
of Singularity of deep learning based
text tox systems uh like exemplified by
mid Journey or stable diffusion in which
images are conditioned by text prompts
uh or if you like they're invoked by
incantations uh the great computational
poet uh Lilian Ivon Bertram has pointed
out that despite or perhaps hand inand
with the Unholy biases built into these
systems these systems are also
nonetheless full of uh inspiring syn
slippages and weirdness but this Savory
weirdness uh becomes ever more elusive
as these systems are bent predictably
and honed towards photorealism and
advertising I'm already nostalgic for
the AIS of two years ago uh and also
prompting based generative systems
privilege the describable I'd like to
talk about some Alternatives and
potentially overlooked forms of
generativity both in my work and in
others you all know this in introd
introducing a discussion of generativity
and AI it's worth considering one of the
very first group exhibitions of computer
art the legendary cybernetic Serendipity
organized by Yasha reichart at the
London Institute for contemporary art
1968 uh the dictionary says Serendipity
is the development of events by chance
in a happy way and I submit to you that
the computer as a tool for the
production of serendipity that is to say
surprise wonder and Magic has been an
abiding theme in computational arts for
the last 60 years it's frequently been
said that once AI works it's no longer
intelligence it's just engineering uh
from my perspective as an artist and as
an educator at a high-tech school no
less under late capitalism it often
seems like everything must be shoehorned
into something productive but making
something for productivity is precisely
the very force that warps AI into
engineering as a human I may or may not
recognize an alien intelligence but I
know what it isn't and it's the
automation of a mundane task if someone
or something makes me question what I
think I know that's a sign of their
intelligence so aspirationally I believe
the job of AI then is to present
Serendipity and taking the strong form
of this the great computational poet
Allison Parish has even issued the
wonderful challenge that art is the only
ethical application of
AI I'd like to discuss one of the most
commonplace forms of generativity
especially with AI as a way of
bootstrapping automation uh even for the
artist um Kyle McDonald has described AI
as programming with examples instead of
programming with code and so the goal of
providing such examples is to obtain
more like this please
this is not my work but this example uh
this animation is called uh this foot
does not exist uh by the provocators at
the new york-based artist Collective
Mischief uh by providing a provided uh
by by excuse me by texting a provided
telephone number visitors to the site
receive text messages containing novel
images of synthetic feet produced by an
AI the Mischief artist note that images
of feet simultaneously operate into two
distinct modes of cultural consumption
uh they have all the transgressive
qualities of traditional pornography but
have no no actual explicit content so
thus the foot pick is both highly
valuable and almost completely worthless
at the same time um depending on the
Observer so exploiting this or exploring
this weird contradiction as the footp
pick as a commodity Mischief Collective
you know connects a generative algorithm
into an oddly ideal social context in
which people want more like this
please um I'd like to show an example of
my own a little darker exploring the use
of generative AI to create more like
this uh it was early 2021 in the middle
of the pandemic it was a pretty dark
time and I started working on a more
personal project a series of grotesques
uh which were meditation on themes of
illness social unrest and identity
especially I was thinking about the
identity of toxic white masculinity my
own relationship to it which fueled the
January 6 interraction in the United
States in an attempt to thwart our
lawful Democratic transfer of power uh
we're coming up on this again and uh you
know thinking about it during this
period I was also thinking about
ambigrams sort of Topsy Turvy images
that are legible both upside down and
right side up some of the best known
ambigrams are are a series of reversible
Faces by the British Artist Rex Whistler
from the 1930s you can see like that
face is uh um the upside down version of
that face um a collection of upside down
pictures created in the 1860s by udagawa
Yoshi Tor uh but the illusion has even
older Roots uh in the 18th and 19th
centuries B veent face Illusions often
used to depict uh were often used to
depict conventional and seemingly
uncomplicated dualities such as young
old happy sad Good Wicked or male
female so uh in collaboration with my
student lingdong hang uh we synthesize
these ambigrams which can be displayed
and viewed in any orientation the
project consists of 55 such ambig
grammatic faces which are presented in a
variety of different formats the system
works by finding upside down faces in
the latent space of right side up faces
uh and in this struggle to match an
upside down face using right side up
ones the AI tends to converge on a face
that can be looked at in both ways
it's a coincidence that this is often a
man with a beard
um I think it's worth pointing out that
from a practical perspective that while
no there's no ready-made prompt system
to generate these things like asking an
image generator to make an upside down
face fails spectacularly uh making this
project required only about one page of
code so the faces in this project uh
reflect reflect the sort of moral
ambiguities of a darker and more
uncertain time marked by misinformation
identitarianism
and the social unrest of a poity divided
against itself it's a variable format
work when the faces are offered dis
still images I present them sideways to
preserve their ambiguity and in time
based media I present them in B veent
videos puppeteered by facial motion
capture recordings and reanimated by an
image warping
algorithm the main goal of this was to
create a tangible format an open-ended
deck of printed po poker siiz cards
participants are encouraged to devise
their own activities with these cards
such as sorting them according to
subjective criteria we're giving them
names and
epitaphs so some other generativity
going to kind of work through a few of
these in my remaining time um so let's
talk about generativity through
interaction this uh any would know this
one it's a it's called nen Spiel or nose
play it's a German toy consisting of a
printed disc about two inches across
with a small Wiggly black chain you
shake it and it makes a new nose uh
shaped through a negotiation between
your own gestural intention and the
randomness of physics uh it's a classic
open-ended generative system as Umberto
Eko describes it an open work um that
invites the audience to interpret it in
multiple potentially unending ways
allowing for personal interaction and
interpretation making the audience an
active participant in the creation of
the artwork's meaning I've been making
gesturally uh based interactive systems
for the past 30 years uh I'm going to
play that it's something I continually
return to this one called yellow Tales
from 1997 and has been a processing demo
since 2000 it's an interative system for
the gestural creation and performance of
real-time abstract animation it repeats
a user's marks end over end allowing a
user to simultaneously specify both a
line's shape as well as its quality of
movement in a single Mark so each line
repeats according to its own period
traveling across a screen space with
tral boundaries producing an
everchanging generative display of
lively wormlike
textures this is its uh sibling o I'll
go back this is its
sibling no this is its sibling
there we go called blue tail uh lesser
known the Lesser known blue tail which
uh the code is exactly the same as
Yellow Tail except for one line of code
uh which happened by accident so uh it
just moves moves propagates the motion
in a different way so installation art
uh particularly interactive installation
art offers the possibility for the
visitor or participant to discover their
own potential as a creative actor and
during the early 2000s I made many full
full body interactive projections that
use computer vision to govern generative
images and sound
uh this one was inspired by my mother
who's a painter when I was small she
used to teach me how to draw from Life
uh she would always talk about negative
space uh and sort of drawing the spaces
around and between the body this can be
a difficult concept for a child nowadays
we have this helpful sort of gang sign
uh which helps makes the concept clearer
um
and there this interest in negative
space developed into this project called
interstitial fragment processor it's an
artwork which heightens one's awareness
of the negative shapes around the body
capturing them to generate a kind of
everchanging and collaborative
composition of lost
holes okay generativity based on
gestural interaction points the way
towards alternatives to today's
commonplace text tox interfaces to AI so
this is recent work by Joel Simon a
former student student who uh uses
computer vision here to track the motion
of a visitor's hand U and then uses that
information to Puppeteer inputs to an
image generator uh this allows one to
capture the subtlety and personality and
the complex motion of one's movement in
a way that language simply
can't okay another type of generativity
as a feed Andrew Norman Wilson has
recently observed that in some contexts
art has become either a financial
instrument or a proposition for interior
Decor this observation has become doubly
true for generative art now nearly
synonymous with nfts some of the most
successful of which manag to be both um
without diminishing the contributions to
that work I think it's which I also do
myself uh it's I think it's important to
remember alternatives to this
alternatives to capitalism if there is
such a thing and the premise is that
generativity really comes into its own
when it has sort of casual subscribers
um an example of this was the wonderful
moth generator twitterbot by uh Everest
Pipkin and Lauren Schmidt launched in
2015 the software generated an imaginary
moth every day and published it through
a Twitter feed moth generator created
and served an audience of more than
10,000 subscribers the software broke in
the Great twitterbot Purge of 2023
disabled alongside thousands of spam
Bots it's an object from a parallel
universe of generative art A Relic from
the era before turbo and [__]
ification let's talk about generativity
and
Behavior I've been chasing a vision for
computational blobs for more than 30
years I'm not only interested in how the
blobs can be generated or how they look
but also how they that can be animated
and brought to life so this is a clip of
me as a college sophomore in 1982
working on the alive project at the MIT
media laboratory under the direction of
Patty mace in a much younger body um uh
these blobs are responding to my my much
younger body a a computer vision system
a computer vision system excuse me was
developed not by me but by several PhD
researchers and doctoral scientists uh a
funny anecdote is that the blobs were
following my hand so as a result I had
to keep my other hand in my pocket or
else the system would get confused uh
which led to some very unnatural ways of
moving but uh the blobs were this thing
that I made that I really wanted to be
in a world with and over the years I've
attempted to breathe life into many
other different kinds of blobs in a
variety of ways on the left is a project
in which a participant uses a single
gesture to simultaneously specify both
the shape of a blob and its quality of
movement that's polygon nervosa from
1997 and on the right is an interactive
organism that responds to gestures
through physical simulation and
generative character animation so his
name is obso and somebody's sort of
yanking him
around uh more recently I created a
project called cyg graphia it's a
real-time interactive dynamically
generated and animated interactive
artwork it's an elgy for species we will
never know or we'll never know again
expressed through generative
illustrations from an imaginary book
about imaginary organisms the work
presents an interactive diagram of a
one-celled microorganism styled to evoke
a handdrawn engraving cell structures
whose appearances and movements arise
emergently and in response to realtime
user interaction
every aspect of the illustration is
generated through custom p5js code
including the interactive Behavior and
the anatomy of the depicted creature the
caligraphic quality of its lines the
asemic letter forms of its labels and
the virtual paper on which it is
rendered according to a recent estimate
there's about 1 trillion species of
microbes on Earth of which
99.999% have yet to be discovered
experts have also calculated that
between 0.01 and .1% of all Earth
species are becoming extinct each year
if these estimates are accurate then
between 100 million and 1 billion
species are becoming extinct each year
the vast majority of which are
undiscovered microbes cyg graphia offers
a kind of borgesian speculation on what
these Vanishing might life forms might
have been like to observe and interact
with and
know um my interactive installation uh
double taker uh is another approach
towards generative animation and sort of
is what you might call generative
character animation it's intended to
produce a double take uh uh in the sense
that every person's worth a second look
so inside this tube is an 800 pound
industrial robot arm and it was
installed on the roof of the Pittsburgh
Center for the Arts during the summer of
um and so here it is there's these kids
in summer camp uh attending summer like
summer art classes at the Pittsburgh
Center for the Arts and um it's sort of
a poetic surveillance system somewhere
between big brother and Sesame Street um
in terms of looking at
them the the a vision system in the
window to its
left and it it withstood two months in
the
rain it was spontaneous I got really
lucky but um a quick anecdote one of the
children attending the summer camp at
PCA made an incredible this is not it
made an incredible crayon drawing of the
double taker with pink lasers coming out
of its eye and this is not that drawing
the teacher gave it to me and I [__]
lost
it and I'll always regret this um and a
few years ago Clare henker tried to
cheer me up she used an AI to try and
recreate the drawing and it was honestly
one of the most thoughtful gifts I've
ever received uh but the resemblance of
the fake to the to the so close to my
memory that it almost makes it hurt
worse so as Lyn Herman said yesterday
keep everything um I want to talk about
generativity and combinatorics all
possible X can a drawing contain a kind
of absolute truth with exhaustive
combinatorics yes these are the only two
possible topologies by which three
things can be connected by uh by lines
not counting configurations in which a
point is disconnected in such depictions
generative rules are executed to their
logical conclusion the visual forms that
result are no longer the arbitrary
product of human imagination but
something more like a fundamental
irreducible property of the universe
itself here's with four points my lower
left here's with five
points and here are all possible graphs
for six and seven points this is work by
arsenic calian uh in such depictions
generative rules are executed to their
logical conclusion the visual forms that
result are no longer the arbitrary
product of human imagination but
something more like a fundamental
property of of the universe and
hopefully many of you know the work Sola
wit which who help Pioneer the ways in
which such rule sets could be considered
artwork Works uh this is an example of
122 frame structures which depict all
possible combinations of cubes with
missing edges such that the structure
remains threedimensional and connected
there are no other possibilities all
have been generated and none are
missing I'm a big nerd I like this kind
of work here's a few more such
generative systems this is these are
conceived by Michael fogelman on the
left all the ways of dividing a 5x5
square into integer size subsquares and
on the right all the possible ways of
mowing a 7 by7 lawn
these generative approaches are
instances of what's called minimum
inventory maximum diversity systems a
term coined by Peter Pierce in his book
nature excuse me structure and nature is
a strategy for design the term describes
a kit of modular parts and rules of
assembly that gives you maximal design
bang for your formal element buck and
nature of course excels at this game
using very simple elements you know all
the proteins are made of just 20 amino
acids all you know all the snowflakes
are made of just you know the single
water molecule
um getting
there uh Egon Irwin Kish has remarked
nothing is more amazing than the simple
truth nothing is more exotic than our
own surroundings nothing's more
fantastic in effect than objective
description and nothing's more
remarkable than the time in which we
live this idea manifests in the next
model of generativity I propose which is
that there's already so much astonishing
stuff out there that we don't actually
need to make more we just need to Civ
what's already there uh find a way to
filter the world in order to find it and
in this section I want to talk about how
AI tools used for analysis rather than
synthesis can play a significant role in
this type of
generativity uh in 2008 I learned about
some research by a German zoologist Dr
Sabina Bal she built a cow detector and
by analyzing thousands of satellite
images with computer vision she
discovered that cows on average face
North SL a very subtle and previously
unknown uh magnet geomagnetic
sensibility in ruminants um I thought to
myself I'm I I can do some computer
vision I want to do that I want to make
a tool that allows me to make similarly
kind of weird discoveries and
increasingly I also began to hear about
companies like orbital Insight that were
you examining satellite imagery for
example of big box parking lots in order
to make and sell economic predictions to
hedge funds and I was like I we I you
know want to counteract that by making
an orbital insight for the rest of us uh
maybe one devoted to weirdness so in
2015 this led to the creation of a
project called Terra pattern uh large
collaborative group David Newbery K
McDonald Irene Alvarado and monari and
Manzel are here bunch of students and
Friends a tool for exploring the
unmapped and unmappable a system for
finding more like this please in
satellite photos it could also be
described as a virtual search engine for
satellite imagery similar image search
for satellite photos sort of intended to
help the public find weird patterns of
Interest primarily a web project sadly
no longer working as Google's API has
broken it uh but the way it worked was
you know click an interesting spot on
the map and it would find other location
that look similar and it was ideal
actually for um I'll play it again yeah
uh for locating specialized nonbuilding
structures and other forms of soft
infrastructure that aren't usually
indicated on maps so uh here's uh
another illustration for example of
finding the unmapped um where the tool
allowed a person to discover all of the
derel nautical wrecks in the New York
City waterways um it was a sort of a
revelatory artwork in which like sort of
panoptic perceptron for open inquiry
here here we were using it to find
circular structures in the Bay Area you
may recognize some of these from the
wars um we mapped all the golf courses
uh and excuse me Golf Course sand traps
uh in my County uh or cue saacs um yeah
Luke DUIs has called the project an
absurdest tool to lay bear the rhetoric
of 20th century formalist analysis in
urban planning and
architecture I can't talk about this
work without acknowledging the influence
of Jenny Odell's satellite uh
collections she's a wonderful artist uh
who was doing this kind of work by hand
um so who and she writes that the view
from a satellite is not a human one nor
is it one we were ever really meant to
see but it is precisely from this
inhuman point of view she writes that we
might be able to read our own Humanity
in all its tiny repetitive marks upon
the face of the
Earth two little bits left gener
generativity and dialogue with real
stuff touching grass when School uh
finally shifted back to inperson
education after the pandemic it could
not be the same as before we needed to
learn how to be around other people
again uh and my art students who had not
had access to the school Studios for SE
for several years had to re reintroduce
to physical
materials after the pandemic I decided
to go back to the roots of computer art
which in which for its first decade
artists like Vera molar Colette Bangert
har coh and Manfred Moore produced their
work by writing code to make drawings
with pen plotting
machines and so at the heart of my
decision was to to make generativity
something that had to happen IRL you
know around other people and from this
was born my current class drawing with
machines as with most sort of research
Studios uh which I call Studio Art
courses in computer science this is a
one room Schoolhouse mixing students who
come from all ranges of levels from
sophomores through doctoral students and
who hail from many different departments
including art architecture Computer
Science Biology engineering a majority
of these students are pursuing
interdisciplinary Arts degrees of some
sort and what they all share is a
baseline foundation in Creative coding
uh but screen based creative coding
using tools like processing and
P5 uh for our main tools we used popular
axid drop plotters which have really
spurred a evolution in Creative coding
and generative art on paper and it was
essential that students encounter real
materials and negotiate real material
conditions combining code and physical
materials like ink and paper
defamiliarized the process of art making
for my students whether they were coming
from primarily traditional or virtual
art
backgrounds and uh so the perfect lines
and surfaces of screen based Graphics
were tossed out the window chiseled pen
nibs Drew lines of different thickness
depending on their orientation ink would
spread depending on on how long the pen
dwell in a given spot some pens would
draw heavier or lighter depending on
whether they were moving left to right
or right to left ink a looked different
over you know over over B than [__] Ink
B over a with some materials like
fingerprint the finger paint the order
of stroke movements mattered
tremendously unlike with office printers
students can now make art with
fluorescent glow-in-the-dark and
invisible inks or plot on colored papers
they could carve into new materials like
copper and Clay through code or involve
unexpected physics importantly all these
different parameters were suddenly under
computational control with the
affordances of iteration conditional
testing data storage yet everything was
infused wobby saabi with analog noise
unpredictability error and texture and
everything took
time forcing students to hang out and
gab with each other while their plots
were executing 10 hours for a plot you
know here's a troue tiling by Aaron
Davey she's a former processing fellow
as well shown it right her tiling is
structured by The XX or Y mod 9 trick if
you know it uh she spent a great deal of
time carefully tuning this this piece in
particular the ratios of the tile size
to the weights of the black gold and
white lines himini Guru Raj made this
really interesting project on body
horror she used a drawing technique
called Wang tiling to generate this plot
of butts and body parts shown here in
detail and at the end of the semester
students you know did their own sort of
self-directed work Angie Bonia created
this and plotted these algorithmically
generated comic books some of which uh
included synthesized Rhymes and others
of which conveyed abstracted Colombian
political histories Benford Kumer used
large format plotter to create party
planning Technologies these were
programs to generate life-size friends
uh to help populate Gatherings and sort
of poetic generated um peculiar
socialization instruction charts for
people to kind of ref familiarize
themselves with other humans
again speaking of somebody who's getting
on on in years one of the things that's
a relief about creating plotter art I
have to say is that the tools age at a
different rate my best plotting machines
are from the 1980s you control them by
sending characters in plain text over
the serial Port it's not quaint it's a
practical alternative to learning new
apis every fall that break after a year
and cloud-based gizmos that turn into
bricks I want to end with some very
latebreaking developments for my
creative coding classroom where it won't
surprise you that I'm exploring waste
inte great generative generative AI
techniques there was a question
yesterday like how can people get
started and I think I can finally
recommend an answer U comfy UI how many
of you know it a few so I have to say
it's for me it's finally the environment
I've been looking for at least a tool
for learning and teaching how to make
custom AI systems it's similar in basic
scheme to things like Max MSP and touch
designer which are widely used in art
schools except it's for generative AI
it's the first AI tool I found with both
a really low floor and a really high
ceiling um way more powerful and general
than mid Journey uh but without the sort
of technical pain of coping with
people's GitHub repositories and collab
notebooks and installing anaconda and so
on indeed one of the best developments
of the past few months is that open
source repositories from Research
Laboratories are often made into comfy
nodes within days often you know just by
the public so in this example here for
example students are able to write p5js
code uh within comfy UI in in an add-on
by by Ben Fox and then use the
generatively produced results such as
this pair of ellipses to guide uh a a
stable diffusion image synthesis process
right making some bugs you probably know
the well-known assignment of sort of
like the sort of the Chuck Close
assignment of making a custom pixel uh
you know you read the P the pixel value
you make a sort of circle with it uh new
things become possible not with uh AI
based image synthesis but with AI based
image analysis in comfy UI so this is a
good example that here's an elephant and
here's a comfy comfy patch which is not
doing some kind of stable diffusion
instead it's using some really nice AI
based modules for doing monocular depth
estimation right to basically produce a
kind of a BS connect depth image like
you know sort of estimating where the
elephant is and also uh the new like
high-end segmentation uh stuff out of uh
meta you know for breaking an image
apart into its component pieces um so
suddenly in addition to an RGB image we
have new channels that we can add to our
to and give to the students with a
simple patch like this so here's um a
P5 oh this is supposed to be a
video oh yeah here we go it's it is a
video so there's uh the elephant here's
a a you know sort of pixel based version
but because it has a depth and
segmentation image we can suddenly treat
the elephant differently and do 3D
tricks right or quasi 3D tricks because
we sort of know where the elephant is in
addition to what is an elephant what's
not so we have new kinds of pixels that
we can or new pixel channels that we can
access in this in what is essentially a
kind of classic uh creative coding
assignment that I've been giving to my
students for decades so uh if you're te
how many teachers we got here yeah Bunch
yeah so uh you know bring this home
comfy UI is the way to go I really
highly recommend it and uh there's great
tutorials online
and in Reddit so I just want to say
thank you so much for your time
[Applause]